hi I'm dr. David Hill and today we're
going to talk about symptoms of leukemia
in childhood leukemia is a cancer
affecting the white blood cells the
cells in the blood that usually help us
fight off disease but when they have a
genetic problem and start to grow out of
control these white blood cells become a
problem eventually crowding out the
other blood cells and also causing
problems in other organ systems where
they may grow too fast and take up space
leukemia peaks between the ages of 2 and
5 and the most obvious symptoms of
leukemia actually involved the blood
cells as the red blood cells get crowded
out by the white blood cells in leukemia
children may become anemic they may
appear pale listless fatigued very
easily they may just not have any energy
those children often deserve a blood
count if they present with those
symptoms in the blood count may show
lymphoma or leukemia when it occurs
another thing that will see is a
reduction in the number of platelets
these are the blood cells that help form
blood clots they're the ones that keep
you from bleeding when the platelets are
low of course you have problems with
bleeding bruises arise bleeding when
children brush their teeth tiny little
red spots called petechiae that don't
fade when you push on them those are
really little microscopic bruises if you
see these those are always a pretty
alarming sign and a child and those
should be evaluated immediately with a
complete physical exam and appropriate
lab work now some of the problems that
leukemia can cause occur outside of the
bloodstream for example it can settle in
the brain take up space and present as a
brain tumor that usually shows up with
increasingly severe headaches headaches
that may awaken the child at night or
cause vomiting any child with headaches
that are getting progressively work
worse always deserves evaluation
leukemia can also affect the bones and
cause bone pain or joint pain so any
unexplained and severe bone pain
deserves getting looked at it may cause
tumors within the skin as well so any
really odd skin finding something that
just doesn't look
right deserves a look-see as well so
remember leukemia while it's still not
terribly common is the most common of
the childhood cancers peaks between age
2 and 5 and can present with excessive
bleeding anemia problems within the
brain pain with the bones or joints or
tumors within the skin the bottom line
is anytime you feel that your child just
doesn't seem right or is unusually sick
you probably should consult his or her
doctor and that person will help you
take it from there talking about
symptoms of childhood leukemias I'm dr.
David Hill